ENC Arg-Per Essay 1st Draft

	Businesses have always protected their product’s designs. The designs for everything from mp3 players and cars to hand tools and medical imaging devices have been placed under lock and key, lest anyone try to copy them. For most businesses, that’s just common sense. If other people can make their products, they won’t be able to make money. But a new business model called open source is emerging that challenges that notion.
	Under the open source model, designs for a product are made publicly available. Anyone can see them, copy them, alter them, and share their altered version, for free. Open source began with software, but has since expanded to include hardware such as circuit boards, custom plastic parts, machined metal parts, and more. Complete stock parts lists, from-scratch assembly instructions, etc. are also provided. This allows anyone to know as much as the creator knows about a product. If the product is good, it will raise a community of people who support it; in turn, the community gives the company a solid reputation. The company will then be able to market its abilities to other companies, bringing in substantially more profit. (wired) The open source model of business provides opportunities for creativity and improvement while still being economically viable
By releasing a product’s designs, businesses open the product to their customers. The people who use a product every day, especially for something that they are passionate about, want that product to be the best it can be. For example, a fashion designer who uses a sewing machine wants it to work as well as possible. As a designer gets more familiar with a particular model, they learn more about the model’s strengths and weaknesses. They may even have some ideas about how to improve it. But the average fashion designer can’t do anything to improve a sewing machine; they must rely on the company to address the issues in the design of the next product. If the sewing machine was open source hardware (OSH), however, they could analyze its design and suggest improvements. So if the fashion designer finds that the machine jams when using a particular type of thread, and he has access to its schematics, he may be able to determine the cause of the problem because of his knowledge of the particular type of thread. He could then help the machine’s creators fix the problem. Customers can also improve the product by suggesting features. For example, the fashion designer might want to be able to see the fabric he is working with more clearly. To do this, he could simply add a light to the arm of the sewing machine. With the schematics, he could open the sewing machines’ casing, drill a small hole big enough for an LED, and install the LED using the sewing machine’s wiring to power it. Even if the company does not integrate a light into the next version of the machine, the open source nature of the machine allowed him to modify it. He can share his modification with the online community of designers, as well as the physical community around him. Open source allows customers to improve the products they rely on, and in return businesses receive free product development aid.
Possibly the most well-known open source project is Linux, although many users no not even know that they are using it. Linux is an operating system (OS) written by Linus Torvalds. However, since he released its source code to the public, other developers have modified the code. He has integrated many of these modifications into the official Linux source code, and community contributions now account for approximately 98% of the modern OS. As an open source project, other companies are free to use, modify, and profit from the code, and they have. A wide range of products run on code that is based off of Linux or uses parts of in. It runs home appliances, wireless routers, cell phones, web servers, TVs, and more. Google’s Android, Apple’s OSX and iOS, Microsoft’s Windows, as well as Roku media streamers run on Linux or use part of its source code. Linux would not be so widely used if it was not open source. 
From the beginning, individuals who liked the idea of a free and open source software (FOSS) operating system used their knowledge to make it a better piece of software. They fixed bugs, added features, etc. Many even wrote their own versions of it for personal use and released them as FOSS. As a result, there are countless distributions (or “distros,” as the community calls them) available, and each one has a different specialty. Ubuntu is the most common beginner Linux distro due to its simplicity and familiar desktop layout. Arch Linux focuses on minimalism and clean source code; it comes as a base system, and everything that the user wants for their specific needs is installed by the user, including the graphical desktop environment (as opposed to the default interface, which is simply a terminal that excepts typed commands). Puppy Linux was built to be incredibly small and keep all the important functions of an OS. It is meant to be used on old or low-power computers, and its short source code allows it to be entirely loaded into the RAM so that none of its files need to be repeatedly read from the slower hard drive. Like the core Linux OS, all of these and many other distros are released as FOSS and have large communities dedicated to improving them.
Since FOS and OSH are open to the public by nature, the ability of a company to make a profit from them is a common concern. However, several businesses that produce open source goods have succeeded, and continue to grow.
	For companies that make OSH, generating revenue is relatively strait forward: they sell the hardware. The potential problem is that individuals may start making the devices themselves or that other companies will copy their product and sell the copy. However, the original creator has certain advantages. First of all, the creator knows more about the product than anyone else, and has spent time and effort to ensure that their products meet a standard of quality. Knock-offs tend to have a much lower quality than the original. For individuals, buying the parts and assembling a copy themselves is often more expensive and time consuming; most do it only as a learning experience or as a way to create a different version of a product. Furthermore, there is often a strong sense of loyalty between an open source community and a company. Members of the community intentionally avoid knock-offs. In exchange, the original creator uses its revenue to further develop its product, usually implementing the suggestions of the community.
	For writers of FOSS, monetizing their product is a little more indirect. Many FOSS projects accept donations which, in some cases, provide significant amounts of revenue. However, to make a reliable income, FOSS writers market their experience to commercial users of their product. For example, the many companies that rely on Ubuntu for their employee’s workstations or for their servers need a guaranteed source of technical support. Conical Ltd., the company that develops Ubuntu, sells technical support to enterprises that use Ubuntu, as well as employee training. It also works with enterprises to fill their specific needs. The Linux Foundation, which maintains and updates the core Linux OS along with Linus Torvalds, who works for/with it, has a similar strategy. They allow businesses with a vested interest in Linux to influence the features that are added to it in exchange for money. While the Linux Foundation may seem to be “selling out,” the features that are added still benefit the community, and the companies that influence them use Linux in many of their products, so consumers benefit as well. Open source hardware companies also market their knowledge by adapting their products to client company’s needs. The company could, technically, make the new device themselves since the original design files are free. But if the company does not specialize in electronics, it will need help from the device’s original creator. 
	Open source products initially seem like an unprofitable business model. It is completely contrary to how most modern businesses are run. However, it has proven to be a viable model for many companies. Open source allows makers to use products creatively, to modify products to fit their needs, and to help improve products. Open source also provides businesses with a strong community that has knowledge from an array of sources focused on improving and expanding their product, at no cost. The community also gives them a good reputation, which helps them profit when other businesses come to them for help. If every product were open source, creativity could provide limitless new ideas.
Quick Reference:
FOSS – Free Open Source Software
OSH – Open Source Hardware
OS – Operating System
Distro – distribution (a different version of Linux)
